[Music]
you up for a little space adventure well
okay then
strap in but today's destination won't
just be a little cosmic pitstop it could
be your next home basically astronomers
have recently found a potentially
habitable planet but the key word here
is potentially so don't go packing your
bags just yet
this planet is called Barnard star B if
you're wondering who Barnard is I'll get
to that a bit later
anyway if you step on its surface you
probably see nothing around you except
endless ice fields look up high into the
dark sky and you'll see a little murky
looking circle no that's not Barnard's
moon it's the planets Sun now look down
deep under your feet like countless
rivers lakes and seas of liquid methane
okay time out none of this sounds like
something I'd call habitable at least
not for humans so that's it there can be
no life here case closed
thanks for watching remember to give
this video a like share it with your I'm
kidding
give Barnard a chance will ya hey you
never know he could be hiding a lot more
life than you'd think in those rivers
and seas of methane okay back to our
story let's explore that murky little
circle that I told you was Barnard Sun
the one the planet is orbiting around
this star is located six light-years
away from us and it's the fourth closest
star to our solar system try to imagine
our Sun five times smaller and much less
bright
well that's Barnard star for you and it
has some other absolutely unique
properties believe it or not it's the
only star that bears the name of the
astronomer who studied it now let's meet
him though Edward Emerson Barnard wasn't
the first to discover this star he
proved in 1916 that it's the fastest
star known to us
yes all the stars are moving across the
universe but barnard star is doing it at
top speeds and not only that it's
actually constantly approaching our
solar system hey don't worry it won't
cause any trouble to anyone but one day
in the next 10,000 years it'll come
closer to us than the sun's current
nearest neighbour star Proxima Centauri
well ten thousand years might sound like
a lot but in the cosmic scale of the
galaxy it's a mere moment maybe two at
the most
Barnard star is what astronomers call a
red dwarf a small dim and truly ancient
star that's getting pretty close to the
end of its life cycle and yes Barnard's
star fits the bill of a red dwarf it's
so ancient that it probably saw the
birth of the Milky Way galaxy itself and
around ten billion years old it's easily
twice as old as our own Sun or something
normally as bright and heavy as a star
being small dim and super fast is pretty
remarkable so it's no wonder Barnard
starred drew so much attention from
astronomers okay but what about all this
talk about a habitable planet I'm
getting there so the first person to
assume there was a planet somewhere near
the star was astronomer peter van de
Kamp back in the 60s he observed wobbles
in the stars movement so wobbles equals
planet well yeah pretty much
you can even conduct your own little
experiment and see for yourself try and
lift something heavy in both hands and
spin it around yourself a few times as
carefully as you can you'll quickly
notice that this object isn't the only
thing that's moving it'll move you to or
at least it'll make you wobble a bit the
exact same kind of wobble is present
when a star is spinning around a planet
itself
unfortunately for peter van de Kamp his
observations were later proved to be
flawed but that doesn't mean he was
completely wrong because there is indeed
a planet around Barnard's star
and we've now come full circle Barnard
star B was finally discovered on
November 14 2018 an international team
of astronomers led by dr. ignosi ribose
from the Institute of Space Studies of
Catalonia started their research 20
years ago when they observed Barnard's
star doing some other weird stuff
besides wobbling from time to time as it
was moving across space it's light would
change it looked kind of red one minute
and then become blueish the next besides
the whole wobbling thing this kind of
shift in starlight is another sign of an
orbiting planet they took lots of
measurements with the most advanced
astronomical equipment you could imagine
and they came out with a 99% certainty
that the planet Barnard's star B exists
now it's considered to be a super earth
class planet sounds kind of epic write
something like Earth's cooler older
brother and that's not exactly wrong
Barnard's star b has slightly more than
24 hours in a day and it's always sunny
there no matter what
and now it's definitely starting to
sound like a better version of Earth but
super earth is just the term astronomers
used to describe only the size of a
planet that's larger than the earth but
considerably smaller than ice giants
like Neptune as for Barnard's star b
it's about 3 times more massive than our
planet but it's nothing like it and you
already know that by now
remember those seas of liquid methane
yeah it's all coming back to me now
anyway besides that this planet is a
huge ball of rock and ice that lies
beyond the habitable zone of its star
even though it's closer to barnard star
than our earth is to the Sun its star
provides only 3% of the light that our
Sun does remember it's a small dim red
dwarf and even if we decided to meet a
new dawn for Humanity on this planet
there'd be one major problem
wouldn't be a dawn at all Barnard star
is so dim that it barely lights up
anything on the planet
and how would you feel about living in
temperatures of negative 275 degrees
Fahrenheit below zero well that's the
estimated average temperature on the
surface of Barnard star B so grab your
mittens the only planet like object in
our solar system that resembles Barnard
star B would be Saturn's largest moon
Titan and that's exactly what makes the
discovery of Barnard's star B so
exciting
astronomers are really interested in
studying Titan and that's why they've
become so enthralled by this new
discovery this planet just like Titan is
partially composed of ice which means
that it has water of course it's too
cold for liquid water to be there but it
has its own forms of lakes rivers and
oceans that you already know our liquid
pools of methane and according to a 2015
study at Cornell University chances are
that simple methane based life forms can
develop and survive in these conditions
so in a nutshell there could be
something alive floating in a methane
lake under the surface of an icy planet
six light years away from where you're
sitting right now pretty cool huh but
let's not forget that the existence of
such life forms is pure theory so the
idea that this newly found Barnard's
star be planet is habitable for us
humans is really far-fetched for now but
in the miraculous world of science
there's always room for new unexpected
discoveries not to mention even if
Barnard's star b isn't exactly a swipe
right for us earthlings we've still got
some other potential candidates actually
one of them is right in our neighborhood
remember Proxima Centauri you know our
son's closest neighbors star well it's
got a planet of its own called Proxima
Centauri be lengthy named but we can
work on rebranding it if we move there
this planet is actually pretty
fascinating it's slightly bigger than
Earth and it receives just enough life
from Proxima Centauri to keep
temperatures above 32 degrees Fahrenheit
although one side of the planet never
she's starlight and the other is
literally baked by the Sun the planets
equator could be quite livable even for
humans so would that make us Proxima
Centauri uns Proxima Centauri beasts and
like I said we'll work out the details
later
so do you really think humankind will
ever find a habitable planet to make our
new home or is it just the stuff of
sci-fi movies let me know your thoughts
down in the comments and don't forget to
give this video a like share it with
your friends and click subscribe to
always stay on the bright side of life
see you next time
[Music]